OSDOCS-11974:reorg of multi nwt docs (#84239)
openshift/openshift-docs: networking/multiple_networks/understanding-multiple-networks.adoc

toc::[]

In Kubernetes, container networking is managed through networking plugins that implement the Container Network Interface (CNI). 

{product-title} uses the Multus CNI plugin to allow chaining of CNI plugins. During cluster installation, you configure your default pod network. The default network handles all ordinary network traffic for the cluster. You can define an additional network based on the available CNI plugins and attach one or more of these networks to your pods. You can define more than one additional network for your cluster, depending on your needs. This gives you flexibility when you configure pods that deliver network functionality, such as switching or routing.

> Administrators or users can leverage xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc#about-user-defined-networks[user-defined networks (UDNs)] or xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-primary-nwt-nad.adoc#understanding-multiple-networks[NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NADs)] to create additional networks of the following types:

Reviewer: firstly this is way way better than before, awesome job with this refactor

secondly UDNs can be used only when OCP is installed with OVNK, not with other CNIs, NADs are also not implemented by Multus alone needs the chained CNI to do it.. @dougbtv do you have a nice suggestion on how we can include that info here? the paragrah starts with multus CNI but multus only knows NADs not UDNs..

Author: @dougbtv @tssurya joe and I tried out hands at better explaining this. Here's our draft paragraph

```suggestion

By default, OVN-Kubernetes serves as the Container Network Interface (CNI) of an {product-title} cluster. With OVN-Kubernetes as the default CNI of a cluster, {product-title} administrators or users can leverage xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc#about-user-defined-networks[user-defined networks (UDNs)] or xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-primary-nwt-nad.adoc#understanding-multiple-networks[NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NADs)] to create one, or multiple, default networks that handle all ordinary network traffic of the cluster. Both user-defined networks and Network Attachment Definitions can serve as the following network types:

* *Primary networks*: Act as the primary network for the pod. By default, all traffic passes through the primary network unless a route is configured to send traffic through other networks, or a network policy is configured to restrict traffic.

* *Secondary networks*: Act as additional, non-default networks for a pod. Secondary networks provide separate interfaces dedicated to specific traffic types or purposes. Only pod traffic that is explicitly configured to use a secondary network is routed through its interface.

However, during cluster installation, {product-title} administrators can configure alternative default pod networks by leveraging the Multus CNI plugin. With Multus, multiple CNI plugins such as ipvlan, macvlan, or Network Attachment Definitions can be chained together to serve as secondary networks for pods.

[NOTE]
====
User-defined networks are not available for use with the Multus CNI plugin.
====

You can define an additional network based on the available CNI plugins and attach one or more of these networks to your pods. You can define more than one additional network for your cluster depending on your needs. This gives you flexibility when you configure pods that deliver network functionality, such as switching or routing.

For a complete list of supported CNI plugins, see "Additional networks in {product-title}".

For information about user-defined networks, see xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc#about-user-defined-networks[About user-defined networks (UDNs)].

For information about Network Attachment Definitions, see xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-primary-nwt-nad.adoc#understanding-multiple-networks[Creating primary networks using a NetworkAttachmentDefinition].
```

Reviewer 2: @tssurya hows this look?

Reviewer 3: I'm onboard with that! Thanks Steven

Reviewer 3: One small change...

I think this captures the initial portion Surya mentioned...

> With OVN-Kubernetes as the default CNI of a cluster, {product-title} administrators or users can leverage UDN

But, I think this needs a slight change:

> With Multus, multiple CNI plugins such as ipvlan, macvlan, or Network Attachment Definitions can be chained together to serve as secondary networks for pods.

to

> Using Network Attachment Definitions will enable multiple CNI plugins to be executed with Multus CNI, such as ipvlan, macvlan, and bridge CNI to attach to secondary networks for pods.

Reviewer: @stevsmit : `For information about user-defined networks, see About user-defined networks (UDNs)` how can audience know which page you have this section in? not intuitive from docs index....

Author: @tssurya Addressed here. I can explain indexing later (in short, we rely more on people CTRL+Finding quoted material than i'd like to admit). For now, I have added a link to the section! :) 

Additionally, I've addressed the above sentence to read as follows: 

[NOTE]
====
User-defined networks are only available when OVN-Kubernetes is used as the CNI. They are not supported for use with other CNIs.
====

Thanks for explaining Multus.

> * *Primary networks*: Act as the primary network for the pod. By default, all traffic passes through the primary network unless a route is configured to send traffic through other networks, or a network policy is configured to restrict traffic.

Author: Updated

By creating multiple networks within a cluster, you gain greater flexibility in network design, as well as enhanced security, scalability, and workload isolation. Multiple networks allow you to configure network topologies tailored to your specific requirements, such as multi-tenancy, traffic isolation, and fine-grained connectivity control between workloads. Multiple networks can be implemented at the namespace level, and as both primary and secondary networks. For primary networks, user-defined networks (UDNs) and network attachment definitions (NADs) are available. For secondary networks, cluster administrators can use NADs or one of several CNI plugins that are available; support for secondary networks with UDN will be added in a future version of {product-title}. Additional CNIs available can be viewed under the "Additional networks in {product-title}" section.

[id="primary-networks_{context}"]
== Primary networks

In {product-title}, the term _primary network_ can refer to one of two things:

// The info about CUDN will be added in a separate PR now that SDN-4930 has been merged.

> * Cluster-wide primary network. This network is global to the entire cluster. When configured, all namespaces use it unless overridden. This network is managed by OVN-Kubernetes, and is configured during cluster installation. {product-title} administrators can configure UDN to serve as the entire cluster's primary network. This option is not available for NADs. For more information about configuring UDN as your cluster-wide primary network, see. . . 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Cluster-wide primary network. This network is global to the entire cluster. When configured, all namespaces use it unless overridden. This network is managed by OVN-Kubernetes, and is configured during cluster installation. {product-title} administrators can configure UDN to serve as the entire cluster's primary network. This option is not available for NADs. For more information about configuring UDN as your cluster-wide primary network, see. . . 
```

> * Cluster-wide primary network. This network is global to the entire cluster. When configured, all namespaces use it unless overridden. This network is managed by OVN-Kubernetes, and is configured during cluster installation. {product-title} administrators can configure UDN to serve as the entire cluster's primary network. This option is not available for NADs. For more information about configuring UDN as your cluster-wide primary network, see. . . 

Reviewer 2: I often struggle with naming conventions. I'm not sure if you want to use CUDN here where you have UDN general or if we want to keep it as is. The issue is that UDN refers to a specific CR that is not cluster scoped. For me, I find these naming issues confusing. Not sure that this helps but wanted to point it out.

//xref will lead to CUDN content in a separate PR.

> * Namespace-scoped primary networks. When configuring namespace-scoped primary networks, {product-title} administrators can choose between NADs or UDNs; {product-title} users are also provided the ability to configure multiple networks for a namespace with UDNs. A combination of NADs or UDNs can also be implemented within a deployment if warranted. For example, an administrator might choose to use a NAD for one namespace, and a UDN for another. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Namespace-scoped primary networks. When configuring a namespace-scoped primary networks, {product-title} administrators can use NADs or UDNs; {product-title} users can configure multiple networks for a namespace using UDNs. A combination of NADs or UDNs can also be implemented within a deployment if warranted. For example, an administrator might choose to use a NAD for one namespace, and a UDN for another. 
```

Author: Cut this.

The following sections provide more information about UDNs and NADs.

[id="user-defined-networks_{context}"]
=== User-defined networks

> User-defined networks offer enhanced customization and isolation by leveraging the `ClusterUserDefinedNetwork` custom resource (CR) or the `UserDefinedNetwork` CR depending on your needs. Unlike NADs, which are only namespaced scope, UDNs offer administrators the ability to create and define additional networks at the cluster level. UDNs also offer both administrators and users the ability to define additional networks at the namespace level.

Reviewer 2: Is it just your needs or is also your role/privileges (i.e. user vs admin)?

User-defined networks can be customized with Layer 2 or Layer 3 topology types, enabling a wide range of network architectures and topologies. 

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 2: I'd cut this promise of future support from the doc. I get where it is heading though and the impetus to add it.

====
* Support for the Localnet topology will be added in a future version of {product-title}.
* Support for Layer 2, Layer 3, and Localnet topologies will be added for UDNs acting as secondary networks in a future version of {product-title}. 
====

Selecting UDN for your namespace's primary network offers greater network isolation, enabling workloads in different namespaces or tenants to operate in separate networks while maintaining security and operational efficiency. This flexibility allows users to configure network connectivity and routing based on the specific needs of their applications. 

For more information about user-defined networks, including the benefits, limitations, best practices, and configuration, see xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc#about-user-defined-networks[About user-defined networks].

[id="network-attachment-definitions_{context}"]
=== Network attachment definitions

> As an alternative to user-defined networks, you can also define more than one network with network attachment definitions (NADs) and the `NetworkAttachmentDefinition` CR. NADs allow administrators to define custom network topologies and connectivity options for pods. They cannot be implemented by {product-title} users. NADs provide support for Layer 2, Layer 3, and Localnet topologies, extending network capabilities and allowing for customizable pod networks. Unlike UDNs, however, NADs are only namespace scoped and cannot be implemented at the cluster-wide level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an alternative to user-defined networks, you can also define more than one network with network attachment definitions (NADs) by using the `NetworkAttachmentDefinition` CR. NADs allow administrators to define custom network topologies and connectivity options for pods. Unlike UDNs, they cannot be implemented by {product-title} users. NADs provide support for Layer 2, Layer 3, and Localnet topologies, extending network capabilities and allowing for customizable pod networks. Unlike UDNs, however, NADs are only namespace scoped and cannot be implemented at the cluster-wide level.
```

> Through the use of NADs, {product-title} administrators can design network topologies that meet unique security, performance, and isolation requirements. By combining NADs with network policies, users can achieve better traffic control and more secure multi-tenant environments. NADs also offer support for multi-homing configurations, allowing a pod to be connected to more than one network at a time. 

Reviewer 2: Is it netpol or multi-network policy?

> For more information about network attachment definitions, including benefits, approaches to management, and configuration, see xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-primary-nwt-nad.adoc#understanding-multiple-networks[Creating primary networks using a NetworkAttachmentDefinition].

Reviewer 2: @tssurya this is the other bulk of the new content.

Administrators or users can leverage xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-user-defined-networks.adoc#about-user-defined-networks[user-defined networks (UDNs)] or xref:../../networking/multiple_networks/primary_networks/about-primary-nwt-nad.adoc#understanding-multiple-networks[NetworkAttachmentDefinition (NADs)] to create additional networks of the following types:

* *Primary networks*: Act as the primary network for the pod. By default, all traffic passes through the primary network unless a route is configured to send traffic through other networks, or a network policy is configured to restrict traffic.

* *Secondary networks*: Act as additional, non-default networks for a pod. Secondary networks provide separate interfaces dedicated to specific traffic types or purposes. Only pod traffic that is explicitly configured to use a secondary network is routed through its interface.

> Additional CNI plugins, such as bridge, host-device, ipvlan, vlan, macvlan, TAP, and SR-IOV are also available as secondary networks. For more information, see "Additional networks in {product-title}".

Author: Doug approved this sentence in a DM @tssurya .
